Al-Shifa Hospital, the largest medical complex in Gaza, has been under siege in the ongoing Israel–Hamas war. The hospital has been completely encircled, cutting it off from the rest of Gaza City, trapping 15,000 people who are either patients in need of treatment or have taken refuge in the hospital grounds. Israel and the United States have stated their intelligence indicates the hospital is used for military purposes by Hamas, a claim that Hamas denies. According to Al Jazeera, the hospital staff have also denied their hospital is being used by Hamas and invited international delegations to come and verify for themselves. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said prior to the siege that there were "strong indications” that hostages were in al-Shifa. Israeli hostages' bodies have been reported by Israel to have been found in the area surrounding the hospital.On 15 November Israeli forces entered the hospital, with the Israeli military saying it discovered a Hamas command centre and weapons cache inside. On 16 November, the IDF said it recovered the body of a hostage from a structure near the hospital. On 17 November, Israel said they had discovered a tunnel entrance, and showed reporters a shaft, with electrical wiring and a metal ladder, leading into the earth. The IDF also said they found another body of a hostage in a building nearby.The raid was widely criticized by "governments, United Nations agencies and other aid organisations". On 16 November, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Volker Türk called for an independent investigation, stating "This is precisely where you need an independent international investigation, because we have different narratives, you cannot use ... hospitals, for any military purposes. But you also cannot attack a hospital in the absence of clear evidence." International law prohibits the targeting of hospitals unless used for a military purpose that is "harmful to the enemy", as well as the use of human shields for combatants; both constitute war crimes.

Background
On 7 October 2023, Hamas invaded Israel as part of a multi-pronged surprise attack, massacring hundreds of civilians and conquering Israeli kibbutzim and towns. Israel conducted a counterattack, airstrikes, and a total blockade on Gaza as retaliation. Israel invaded the Gaza Strip on 27 October, and Gaza City was surrounded on 2 November.Al-Shifa is the largest hospital in the Gaza Strip. Israel has claimed that it is a Hamas control and command center. During the 2014 Gaza War, Israel, following an Egyptian proposal, halted its air strikes, and Hamas immediately began firing rockets at Israel. The Washington Post reported at the time that the Shifa Hospital had "become a de facto headquarters for Hamas leaders, who can be seen in the hallways and offices." Amnesty International reported in 2015 that Hamas had used abandoned areas of the hospital to "detain, interrogate, torture and otherwise ill-treat suspects" while the hospital was operational.The IDF has ordered all civilians in the region to evacuate on 13 October. The IDF reported that Hamas was preventing the evacuation of civilians from the area and particularly from Al Shifa hospital, with the IDF claiming Hamas was using civilians as human shields.The IDF again requested all civilians in Northern Gaza and specifically Al-Shifa hospital to   evacuate on 9 November. Thousands of displaced civilians were sheltering in the hospital at the time of the attacks on 11 November.

Legal status
Under the laws of war, hospitals normally enjoy protected status, making it forbidden to turn them into a conflict zone. However, that status is lost if there is evidence that the hospital is being used to make an "effective contribution to military action"; examples provided by Israel in its 2006 Rules of Warfare manual where a protected civilian structure loses its status include an anti-aircraft battery on the roof of a school, or a sniper in a mosque.According to the Red Cross, this exception should be read narrowly; any doubt that the structure is being used for military purposes should result in it being presumed to not be.  According to Israel and the United States, conclusive evidence exists that Hamas used the building for military purposes; Hamas denies this.In addition, strict rules that limit how force can be used still apply; civilians must be given the chance to evacuate, and civilians who remain in the building are still protected and cannot be targeted directly. Prior to the raid, Israel called for the evacuation of the hospital, but on November 13 doctors refused to do so, saying that they had to remain in order to tend to over 700 at risk patients. According to Hamas, civilians were unable to evacuate due to sniper fire and drone attacks.

Initial clashes and siege
On 3 November, an Israeli airstrike targeted an ambulance convoy leaving the hospital. The attack killed 15 and wounded 60. Israel claimed that Hamas was using the ambulances. Neither the Washington Post nor the Human Rights Watch found anything to evidence the Israeli claims. The Palestine Red Crescent Society (PRCS) stated that Israel had targeted Al-Shifa ambulances 7 times prior and had killed 4 of their personnel. On 6 November, Israeli forces struck and destroyed the solar panels atop the hospital, leaving it fully reliant on back-up generators powered by rapidly dwindling fuel supplies.On 10 November, at least four strikes hit various areas of the hospital with various projectiles. Israel claimed that at least one projectile was a misfired militant rocket, but did not elaborate further. The Gaza Health Ministry (GHM) claimed that there were at least 5 strikes damaging parts of the hospital complex,- two, at 2 and 8 am., hitting the maternity ward located on the upper floors,- stating that 14 people had been killed. Later a Palestinian doctor stated that 7 people had died following the strikes. On the same day, it was reported that Israeli forces were at the gates of the hospital.According to a follow-up investigation commissioned by the New York Times from experts who examined videos and remnants of the munitions, three of the projectiles fired at the hospital were Israeli.On 11 November, the GHM claimed that an evacuation was underway. It claimed that 50,000–60,000 people were sheltering in the hospital before, and that fewer than 3,000 people remained. Later that day, the PRCS claimed that Israeli tanks were 20 meters away from the hospital. Doctors Without Borders (DWB) and the World Health Organization (WHO) claimed that Israeli troops were shooting at those trying to exit the hospital, which Israel denied. Israel claimed that they were letting people leave the hospital, which DWB denied. By this time, Al-Shifa ran out of fuel and had suspended some operations. As a result, 2 babies in incubators and two other patients died. The hospital director said that the hospital had electricity until the morning of 12 November, meaning that 37 babies in incubators are at risk of dying. The GHM claimed that 100 bodies would be buried in a mass grave inside the hospital.In a series of comments with Al Jazeera, Muhammad Abu Salmiya, the director of the hospital, said that the hospital was cut off from the rest of the city, trapping a reported 15,000 people inside. He also added that "patients were dying by the minute, victims and wounded were also dying, even babies in incubators."The Israeli military denies the siege of Al-Shifa after one of the senior Israeli military official issued a statement. The official stated that there wasn't any shooting or siege, and that the east side remained open.On 12 November, the WHO lost contact with the hospital. The hospital director said that premature babies were in a 'precarious situation' and that they were transferred to an 'unhealthy location'. At this time, power was completely cut off in the hospital. Minister of Health Mai Al-Kalia stated that over 100 bodies were buried in the graveyard, however the medical teams were unable to make a mass grave in the courtyard due to the 'seriousness of the field situation.' She also added that 39 babies were at risk of death and that one baby died that morning due to lack of fuel. Doctors in Al-Shifa Hospital reported snipers at the outskirts of the complex were firing at ”any moving person”.Hamas officials had reported to Agence France-Presse that the cardiac ward was struck by Israeli air strikes, which was confirmed by witnesses but not by AFP.On 12 November, Israel attempted to provide 300 litres of fuel to the hospital, which they claim was blocked by Hamas. In response, a spokesperson for the health ministry stated that al Al-Shifa needed 8000-12000 gallons of fuel to run for a day, and that 300 litres would keep the hospital running for half an hour. Additionally, hospital staff noted there was no way to receive this fuel, as no ambulances were arriving at Al-Shifa and risk getting caught in crossfire, urging that the only way to safely access the fuel was with a pause in fighting. On 13 November, about 50 people tried to evacuate from the hospital, but they said that Israeli forces fired at them, wounding one man.

15 November raid
Just after midnight on 15 November, Israeli forces informed officials that they would shortly be raiding the hospital. Hospital staff reported sounds of clashes from outside the grounds, and Israel reported killing several Hamas militants outside of the grounds.Following the raid, Israel stated that they had delivered supplies to the hospital, including battery-powered incubators, medical supplies and baby food. Reuters verified that a photo of boxes labelled as medical supplies and baby food was taken inside the hospital. Israel also reported finding weapons and other "terror infrastructure" within the hospital; "concrete evidence", they said, of Hamas using the hospital as a "terror headquarter". According to the BBC, an Israeli official said that Israel had found weapons and terror infrastructure but did not immediately provide evidence.According to a journalist inside the hospital, Israel was interrogating people within the hospital on Wednesday morning, including doctors and patients. According to a witness, Israeli forces fired a smoke bomb into the hospital that "caused people to suffocate", while a spokesperson for the Gaza Health Ministry said "The occupation army is now in the basement and searching the basement. They are inside the complex, shooting and carrying out bombings." Dr. Munir al-Bursh, the general director of Gaza hospitals, told Al Jazeera, "Patients, women and children are terrified."The decision to directly raid the hospital led to widespread criticism from "governments, United Nations agencies and other aid organisations".

Alleged military use
There have been allegations that Hamas has been using the Al-Shifa Hospital for military purposes. Izzat al-Risheq, a Hamas official, denied allegations that the group was using Shifa Hospital as a shield for its underground military structures, saying there was no truth to the claims. On 14 November, Associated Press stated Israel had provided no visual evidence for its claims.On 14 November 2023, the U.S. National Security Council spokesperson, John Kirby, said that the United States had its own intelligence sources indicating that Al Shifa hospital was being used by Hamas to run military operations and store weapons, which constitutes a war crime.Al-Shifa staff had  appealed to the international community to send international delegations to the hospital to see that no military actions were taking place in the hospital.On 14 November, Reuters reported that Israel was coordinating the transfer of medical incubators to Al Shifa hospital in order to assist in the evacuation of new born babies. On 15 November, the IDF soldiers carried cardboard boxes into Al-Shifa, labelled in English as "medical supplies" and "baby food." An emergency room employee stated Israel "did not bring any aid or supplies, they only brought terror and death" while another contact within the hospital said that Israeli soldiers had supplied water to elderly patients.The Geneva-based human rights organization Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Monitor stated, "The Israeli army is the only party controlling the scene inside the al-Shifa Medical Complex, amid a total media blackout. No third party or international organization was permitted to be present inside... Therefore, there are concerns that the army might be creating the scene that might be released later."The IDF then released photos showing "Military uniforms, 11 guns, three military vests, one with a Hamas logo, nine grenades, two Qurans, a string of prayer beads, a box of dates." Former US State Department legal advisor Brian Finucane, said "These arms by themselves hardly seem to justify the military fixation on al-Shifa, even setting the law aside".Following the release of the Israeli photos, Al Jazeera senior political analyst Marwan Bishara stated, "It's kind of baffling. Why would Hamas leave the guns and not anything else?" Bishara added that Israel "doesn't have anything to show as justification for the genocide that they've carried out against Gaza and for the bombings of the hospitals and other facilities and for the collective punishments."Mouin Rabbani, a Middle East analyst, stated to Al Jazeera, "Israeli forces have invaded Shifa Hospital and been inside it for 12 full hours – having refused any independent party to accompany them – and now we're supposed to believe that there were Hamas militants in there being pursued by the Israeli military but they somehow left their weapons behind? The fact of the matter is, 40 days into this war, their main achievement is raising the Israeli flag over a hospital which I think, to any serious military analyst, is laughable."Israeli forces continued to search the facility for a second day, unearthing what they described as a tunnel entrance on the perimeter of the hospital complex, although they have yet to enter due to fear of booby traps and it may be days before they do so. New York Times journalists visited the site and verified that a concrete shaft descending into the earth existed, and that electrical wiring and a ladder was visible, although they were not able to determine how deep the shaft was or where it lead. The military said the search would take time. Jeremy Scahill stated, "The Israelis have a multidecade track record of lying, of promoting false information, releasing doctored videos... I watched the so-called evidence the Israelis have released, and I’m an American from the United States, and I’ve seen more guns in the homes of ordinary Americans than in this purported Hamas Pentagon under al-Shifa Hospital." Netanyahu stated in an interview with CBS that the Israeli government had "strong indications” that hostages were in al-Shifa, which was one of the reasons they entered the hospital, adding that "I think the less I say about it, the better." On 16 November, the IDF reported that the body of Yehudit Weiss, a 65-year old woman who was captured from Be’eri kibbutz, had been located in a structure nearby to the hospital. On 17 November, the IDF had discovered the body of 19-year-old Cpl Noa Marciano in a building next to the hospital.

Impact and casualties
The situation at al-Shifa Hospital is part of a serious healthcare crisis in Gaza. The hospital is rapidly running out of electricity, food and medical supplies. The last generator ran out of fuel, killing three premature babies and four other patients. Another 36 children are at risk of death. According to a doctor at the hospital quoted in a 15 November BBC article, six premature infants have died, as has a critically ill adult burn victim. The doctor attributes these deaths to a lack of fuel for incubators, oxygen, and other essential medical equipment.The blockade has resulted in a humanitarian disaster, with numerous Palestinians seeking refuge in medical facilities. The toll on civilians, particularly children, has been extensive, with almost half of Gaza’s hospitals shutting down due to acute fuel scarcity. The hospital has had to provide makeshift housing, and the absence of clean water and sanitation services is exacerbating the transmission of infectious diseases.Amidst the siege, Hamas suspended hostage negotiations due to Israel's takeover of Al-Shifa Hospital and heavy fire as Israeli forces approached the facility.Gaza officials said an airstrike destroyed the hospital's cardiac ward, while a power cut shut down the neonatal unit's incubators where around 40 children were hosted and ventilators for others receiving urgent care. By 12 November, two critically ill patients in the ICU had died because of a lack of electricity and oxygen.By 15 November, 43 out of 63 intensive care patients have died as oxygen in the intensive care unit ran out, according to Dr. Ahmed Mokhallalati.

Reactions
Government
China has described the struggling hospital as a manifestation of the humanitarian crisis in Gaza. The Palestinian Minister of Health, Mai al-Kaila, described Israeli actions as a "crime against humanity." Israel disputes this, claiming it does all it can to protect civilian life, claiming that it is Hamas that puts civilians in harms way by blocking their evacuation from combat zones. US President Joe Biden stated Gaza's hospitals "must be protected." Justin Trudeau stated, "Even wars have rules... I urge the government of Israel to exercise maximum restraint... The world is witnessing this, the killing of women and children, of babies. This has to stop." Ayman Safadi, the Jordanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, condemned the attack, stating, it was a "violation of international humanitarian law, especially the 1949 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War." Qatari foreign minister, Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al Thani, stated the siege was a "war crime and a blatant violation of international laws." The Saudi Arabian foreign ministry stated it "strongly condemns the Israeli occupation forces’ storming of al-Shifa Hospital in Gaza."

Academics
H. A. Hellyer, a fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, stated a huge trust deficit remained regarding Israeli intelligence, and that Israeli claims should not be taken at "face value." Sultan Barakat, a professor at Hamad Bin Khalifa University in Qatar, stated US and Israeli information on Gaza was not reliable. Osamah Khalil, a professor at Syracuse University in New York, stated Israel's raid of Al-Shifa was "pure bullying."

Media
Antony Loewenstein noted Israel has a long history of "deliberately targeting medical facilities in the West Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza," and that IDF claims about military facilities needed to be "treated with deep scepticism." Palestinian analyst Thabet Al-Amour stated, "This is madness, absolute madness… It's a hospital." Al Jazeera journalist Hamdah Salhut stated Israel had not shown "solid proof, or evidence" to back up their claims.

Organizations
The World Health Organization (WHO) confirmed that Al-Shifa Hospital is without electricity, putting patients, including children, at risk of death. WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said on social media that al-Shifa had been without water for three days and was "no longer functioning as a hospital". Doctors Without Borders reported that an ambulance and the patients inside were attacked near the hospital. A spokesman for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement stated, "I cannot even imagine … the panic among the patients, the panic among doctors and nurses. What they're [going] through is really something that is unbelievable."A group of Israeli doctors, known as Doctors for the Rights of Israeli Soldiers, has signed a statement advocating the bombing of Al-Shifa hospital. The statement was publicly signed by dozens of Israeli doctors and was widely shared on various social media platforms. The doctors claimed that it was Israel's "legitimate right" to bomb al-Shifa hospital because it served as a base for "Palestinian armed groups". Alice Rothchild, the director of Jewish Voice for Peace, stated noted Israel's lack of hard evidence of military operations at al-Shifa, stating, "Israeli sources have a long history of not being very accurate."

See also
Al-Ahli Arab Hospital explosion
Attacks on health facilities during the 2023 Israel–Hamas war


== References ==