The Aleppo bombings (April–July 2016) were intense bombardments on both rebel and government-held areas in the city of Aleppo, Syria starting in late April 2016. Some rebel shelling also hit a Kurdish-held part of the city. The bombings decreased in intensity after 55 days when a temporary truce was established. However, the bombings continued through July.

The attacks
Al-Quds Hospital
On 27 April 2016, four consecutive airstrikes in an opposition-held district of Aleppo hit and destroyed al-Quds hospital and nearby homes. Witnesses said a missile from a low-flying fighter jet hit the hospital directly. The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said at least 27 people were killed. Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) helped to support the hospital and initially said 14 patients and medical staff were killed. On 4 May 2016, MSF released a statement saying the death toll had risen to 55 after more bodies were found. According to MSF, the pediatric unit of the hospital was almost completely destroyed and the emergency room and laboratory were both entirely destroyed. MSF said the hospital would not be able to reopen for at least two weeks.NPR reported that Russia and the Syrian government were the only two groups with aircraft in the area. According to a US State Department official, there were indications the Syrian government solely conducted the bombing of the hospital. The Guardian reported that the attack was "part of a broader pattern of systematic targeting of hospitals by the government of Bashar al-Assad". No one claimed responsibility for the airstrike.

Malla Khan mosque
On 29 April, the Malla Khan mosque in a government-controlled neighborhood was hit by rockets, killing at least 15 people. The Syrian government reported that the Syrian rebels are behind the attack.

Al-Dabit hospital
On 3 May, the Syrian rebels fired rockets at government territory and killed 19 people. The rockets hit a hospital and killed 3 and wounded 17, according to government sources.

Alleged chemical attacks
On 2 August, Russia claimed that the Nour al-Din al-Zenki Movement bombed with chemical weapons the government held areas of Aleppo, inflicting losses in civilian population.

Reactions
 United Nations - The UN Syria envoy Staffan de Mistura condemned the attack on the al-Quds Hospital and believes that it was a deliberate war crime. The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights also condemned the "monstrous disregard for civilian lives by all parties to the conflict."
 France - The French government "utterly condemn the bombing targeted against Al Quds Hospital in Aleppo" and called for a meeting of the International Syria Support Group.
 Qatar - The Qatari envoy to the Arab League has called for a league meeting to discuss the "dangerous escalation seen in Aleppo were civilians are subjected to massacres at the hands of the forces of the Syrian regime, which led to the deaths and injuries of hundreds."
 United States - The US State Department was "outraged by yesterday’s airstrikes in Aleppo on the al-Quds hospital supported by both Doctors Without Borders and the International Committee of the Red Cross, which killed dozens of people, including children, patients, and medical personnel."


== References ==