Andrew Frangella DDS, FICOI, FAGD, is a US-based general dentist that specializes in cosmetic dentistry and Oral Implantology. He is known for engaging multidisciplinary approach in the field of cosmetic dentistry.  Dr. Andrew is listed in the Long Island Pulse Magazine as one of America’s Top Dentists. He is also named as one of the Top 10 Dentists in Social Media.

Early life and education
Born on August 20, 1977, in Bethpage, New York, the young Andrew Frangella completed  his high school education at St. Anthony's High School in 1995. He proceeded to Lehigh University and graduated with B.A degree in Biology. After college, Andrew had his Dentist (DDS) training at New York University College of Dentistry.Dr. Andrew Frangella was awarded Fellowship from the Academy of General Dentistry. He also completed Fellowships in Oral Implantology at the Misch Institute in affiliation with Temple University, Pennsylvania and the International Congress of Oral Implantologists (ICOI).

Dental career
Dr. Andrew Frangella started his medical career as a cosmetic dentist  trained in advanced  CAD/CAM dentistry, orthodontics, endodontics, and certified in Invisalign orthodontic appliances. He currently practices general and cosmetic dentistry  alongside his two sisters, Tina M. Frangella DDS, and Laura O. Frangella, DDS at Frangella Dental in Midtown Manhattan, New York.Dr. Andrew Frangella lectures the dental community on various topics involving new technologies in the field of dentistry.  Along with his two sisters in the dental field, he co-authored a book titled Social Media for Dentistry. Dr. Frangella is a fellow of the International Congress of Oral Implantologists, Academy of General Dentistry (AGD) and Misch Implant Institute. He is a co-founder of Imagine Dental Technologies, LLC and a member of the American Dental Association (ADA).

Awards
Dr. Robert A. Sussman Memorial Award (2005)
AGD Fellowship Award (2011)

See also
Cosmetic dentistry
Academy of General Dentistry

References
External links
Official website