Gerald Peter Curatola, D.D.S. (born November 10, 1957), is a dentist, Adjunct Clinical Associate Professor at New York University, known for his contributions in cosmetic dentistry. He is a dental contributor to Fox News Channel, AOL Health, and Dr. Oz, and has appeared on the Martha Stewart Show, NBC's Your Total Health, and ABC networks. Curatola is the founder of Rejuvenation Dentistry, and the co-inventor and co-developer of REVITIN Oral Therapy.

Early life and education
Gerald Peter Curatola was born on November 10, 1957, in New York City to Italian American parents.His mother, Mildred, was the daughter of Italian immigrants, Gerardo and Marion Muccitelli, from Rome and Bari, Italy. Curatola is second of three children of Vincent and Mildred, having an older brother and younger sister. He grew up in North Woodmere, New York, on Long Island after the family moved from Ozone Park, New York, in 1962.
Curatola attended Chaminade High School in Mineola, New York, a private boys' Catholic preparatory school. He went on to Colgate University in Hamilton, New York, graduating in 1979, majoring in Neuroscience, a topical concentration in Biology and Psychology. Curatola began dental school in the Fall of 1979 at New York University College of Dentistry and served as President of his dental school class until becoming the NYUCD Student Body President in his last year until his graduation in 1983.Curatola has been a member of the teaching faculty at NYU since 1984 serving as a Clinical Instructor in Dental Materials and presently, Adjunct Clinical Associate Professor in the Department of Cariology and Comprehensive Care.

Early career
In 1982, while in dental school Curatola organized a dental mission to the island of Jamaica in conjunction with the Ministry of Health in the Jamaican Government and the U.S. Peace Corps, whose facilities were used on the island to provide dental care in critically under-served areas for three months. His work there earned him recognition and a citation from the Jamaican Government.After graduating from NYU with his D.D.S. degree in 1983, Curatola continued to provide pro bono dentistry to the Bowery Mission in New York City while building his own dental practice with a special interest in the emerging field of Cosmetic Dentistry. By 1985, his cosmetic dentistry work was published in the New York State Dental Journal and garnered the attention of the DenMat Corporation in Santa Maria, CA who hired him as a national lecturing clinician.In addition to serving as an Assistant Attending in Dentistry at Cabrini Medical Center, Curatola returned to NYU to join the teaching faculty at the College of Dentistry. In 1991, he founded the Curatola Dental Group, a general and cosmetic dentistry practice in midtown Manhattan, New York. In 1995, Curatola continued his education in natural medicine, attending Harvard University's Symposiums in Complementary and Alternative Medicine under the direction of David Eisenberg, the founder of Harvard Medical School's Center for Alternative Medicine Research and Education (now the Division for Research and Education in Complementary and Integrative Medical Therapies of Harvard's Osher Research Center).

Rejuvenation Dentistry
Curatola founded Rejuvenation Dentistry in 2005. There are Rejuvenation Dentistry affiliates in five cities: New York, London, Paris, Rome and East Hampton.

Revitin
Curatola invented Revitin, a prebiotic naturopathic toothpaste.

Humanitarian service and contributions
Curatola has traveled to five continents to provide dental services in areas that are under-served, as well as educate and equip other dental professionals to do the same.Locally, Curatola helped to establish the Pediatric Dental Fund of the Hamptons, a dental charity founded by local pediatrician, Gail Schoenfeld, which provides free dental care to children on Long Island's East End. He contributes and provides pro bono dental services to local charitable organizations including The Retreat, a shelter for victims of domestic violence.

Personal life
Curatola met his wife, Georgia Ann Condzal, at NYU while finishing dental school and they were married shortly after his graduation in 1983. They have three children.
Curatola served on the Board of Trustees of Ross School in East Hampton for seven years, retiring in 2010.  His children attended and graduated from the Ross School.

Media coverage
Curatola has contributed to numerous television and radio programs including The Dr. Oz Show, The Martha Stewart Show, ABC News, Fox News, NBC, CBS, and CNN. Curatola and Rejuvenation Dentistry have been featured in the New York Post.Curatola is the author of the no longer available book, Smile For Life: The Art and Science of Rejuvenation Dentistry.

Honors and awards
Curatola Wing For Clinical Research established at [New York University], November, 2006

Patents
Awarded United States Patent #6,503,483 for a dental formulation. Jan., 2003 
Awarded United States Patent #6,207,137 for a dental formulation. March, 2001
Awarded United States Patent  #5,925,335 for a dental formulation. July, 1999

References
External links
 Media related to Gerry Curatola at Wikimedia Commons