Ibraheem S. Samirah (born August 20, 1991) is an American politician. He served as a member of the Virginia House of Delegates from the 86th district from 2019 to 2022. First elected in a special election, he was defeated for re-election in the Democratic primary by Irene Shin in June 2021. 
In 2023, he unsuccessfully ran for the Democratic nomination for State Senate for Virginia's 32nd State Senate District.

Early life and education
Samirah was born in Chicago on August 20, 1991, a first generation U.S. citizen, to Jordanian-Palestinian immigrant parents. Samirah's grandparents were Palestinian refugees. His mother was pursuing a special education master's degree while working as a teacher and his father was completing a PhD and involved in activism.
When he was in middle school in 2003, Samirah's father was denied re-entry into the United States as a security risk. According to Samirah, his father was returning home to Chicago after visiting Samirah's sick grandmother. He eventually moved to Amman in Jordan with his family. In an interview with Washingtonian, Samirah described it as a “depressing time.” Samirah's father was eventually readmitted to the United States in 2014.In 2013, Samirah graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in government and political science from American University. At American, he was a member of the historically Jewish fraternity Sigma Alpha Mu despite being Muslim. He was also a member of Students for Justice in Palestine and founded the first-ever college chapter for Jewish Voice for Peace at American University.In 2014, Samirah made a series of posts on his Facebook account while he was a dental student which expressed criticism of the Israeli government. One post shared a letter written by Brian Eno in response to Palestinian civilian casualties as a result of Israel Defence Forces airstrikes during 2014 Gaza War, which stated that "funding Israel is like supporting the Ku Klux Klan". On another post, Samirah wrote in response to the death of Ariel Sharon that the former prime minister of Israel should "burn a million times for every innocent soul you killed" along with "our beloved Arab 'leaders' (butchers I should say)". In 2019, these posts resurfaced due to being reported on by the far-right Big League Politics website, and Samirah was criticized by political opponents and accused of racism and antisemitism. Samirah subsequently apologized for the posts, though he characterized attacks on him as "a smear campaign."He earned his Doctor of Dental Medicine (DMD) from the Henry M. Goldman School of Dental Medicine at Boston University in 2017. While he attended dental school, Samirah was a member of Black Lives Matter, Students for Justice in Palestine, and Jewish Voice for Peace.

Virginia House of Delegates
Elections
After Jennifer Boysko was elected to the Senate of Virginia in 2019, Samirah ran in the special election to complete the remainder of her term in the Virginia House of Delegates.
Samirah defeated Republican Gregg G. Nelson and independent Connie H. Hutchinson, receiving 60% of the vote to Nelson's 34% and Hutchinson's 6%, on February 19, 2019. He was sworn in the next day, becoming the second Muslim elected to the Virginia General Assembly after Sam Rasoul. He was unopposed and won reelection on November 5, 2019.In June 2021, he was defeated in the Democratic primary by non-profit organizer Irene Shin. In 2023, he was an unsuccessful candidate for State Senate in the Democratic primary for Virginia's 32nd State Senate District.

Policy positions
Women's rights
Samirah supports codifying and expanding abortion rights. He voted to pass the Equal Rights Amendment.

Energy and the environment
Samirah supported enacting a Green New Deal at the state level.

Gun rights
Samirah supports gun control.

Electoral reform
In the 2019 session, Samirah voted in favor of the proposed amendment to the Virginia constitution to create a permanent bipartisan commission for redistricting. In the 2020 session, Samirah backed a bill to allow for expanded absentee voting and recognize election day as a state holiday. Samirah supports adopting automatic voter registration.

Marijuana legalization
Samirah supports legalizing cannabis for recreational use.

Health care
Samirah favors universal health care at the state level.

Labor relations
Samirah supports expanding union and worker rights such as removing Virginia's right-to-work law.

Zoning reform
He supports using state legislation to preempt local zoning ordinances to allow for more multi-family residential, high-density developments on properties currently zoned for single-family detached homes only. Samirah supported allowing property owners to convert their properties from single-family units to two-family duplexes, townhouses, or cottages in both established and new neighborhoods without going through the existing local processes for rezoning a residential property.

Protesting
On July 30, 2019, Samirah was escorted out of a speech by Donald Trump in Jamestown, Virginia after disrupting the event by standing up and waving card signs consisting of the words "Deport Hate," "Reunite My Family," and "Go Back to Your Corrupted Home."

Electoral history
Personal life
Samirah lives in Sterling, Virginia.

References
External links
Official websiteProfile at Vote Smart