Lester George Jackson III (born July 26, 1959) is an American politician, educator, and dentist. He is a former state senator from Chatham County, Georgia. He was the 2009 presidential appointee to the Democratic National Committee, becoming the first person from the coastal region of Georgia to serve in this capacity in over 19 years.

Biography
A Savannah family dentist, Jackson was first elected to the State Senate in 2008 following 10 years of service in the House of Representatives. He was named Georgia's Freshman Legislator of the Year in 1999 by Georgia Legislative Black Caucus. He served as assistant house majority whip. The Georgia Dental Association honored him as the Legislator of the Year in 2000 and 2002, and he received the 2001 Distinguished Service Award from the National Dental Association. In 2000, Jackson was a delegate to the Democratic National Convention in Boston; and again a delegate in Denver in 2008. He was selected by the Georgia Legislative Black Caucus as its Legislator of the Year in 2008 and 2010. He is a Fellow of the Pierre Fauchard Academy Dental Society.
As of 2013, Jackson served on the Senate Agriculture and Consumer Affairs, Economic Development, Health and Human Services, Higher Education, and Urban Affairs Committees.A lifelong resident of Savannah and a product of Chatham County public schools, Jackson received the Savannah Community Service Award in 2009. He is also the recipient of the 2009 Savannah State University Alumni Association Legislator of the Year Award. He attended Paine College and in 1985 received his doctor of dental surgery degree from Meharry Medical College. He is an assistant adjunct professor at Medical College of Georgia and an adjunct professor at Armstrong Atlantic State University.
Jackson is a U.S. Navy veteran and a life member of the NAACP, and a life member of Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity. He is a charter member of the Savannah Chapter of the 100 Black Men, and member of the American Legion, Post 500. 
He and his wife, Dr. Lorna Jackson, have four children.

See also
List of state government committees (Georgia)

References
External links
Profile at the Georgia State Senate
Lester Jackson for Labor Commissioner
Georgia State Senate bio of Jackson