Operation Tannenberg (German: Unternehmen Tannenberg) was a codename for one of the anti-Polish extermination actions by Nazi Germany. The shootings were conducted with the use of a proscription list (Sonderfahndungsbuch Polen), compiled by the Gestapo in the two years before the invasion of Poland.The secret lists identified more than 61,000 members of the Polish elite: activists, intelligentsia, scholars, clergy, actors, former officers and others, who were to be interned or shot. Members of the German minority living in Poland assisted in preparing the lists.Operation Tannenberg was followed by the shooting and gassing of hospital patients and disabled adults, as part of the wider Aktion T4 programme.

Implementation
Following the orders of Adolf Hitler, a special unit dubbed Tannenberg was created within the Reich Security Main Office (Reichssicherheitshauptamt). It commanded a number of Einsatzgruppen units formed with Gestapo, Kripo and Sicherheitsdienst (SD) officers and men who were theoretically to follow the Wehrmacht (armed forces) into occupied territories. Their task was to track down and arrest all the people listed on the proscription lists exactly as it had been compiled before the outbreak of war. The plan was finalized in May 1939 by the Central Office II P (Poland).The first phase of the action occurred in September 1, 1939, and was perpetrated by the Einsatzgruppen, with assistance from the Volksdeutscher Selbstschutz and local SA militias. Many listed targets were killed. Some officials were beaten and mutilated. Pregnant women were also not spared.

Massacres of hospital patients
After the extermination of the Polish elite, patients from Polish hospitals were murdered in Wartheland (Wielkopolska) by Einsatzgruppe VI men. They were led by Herbert Lange, who was under the command of Erich Naumann. He was appointed commandant of the first Chełmno extermination camp soon thereafter. By mid-1940, Lange and his men were responsible for the murder of about 1100 patients in Owińska, 2750 patients at Kościan, 1558 patients and 300 Poles at Działdowo who were shot in the back of the neck; and hundreds of Poles at Fort VII where the mobile gas-chamber (Einsatzwagen) was first developed along with the first gassing bunker.According to the historian Peter Longerich, the hospital massacres were conducted on the initiative of Einsatzgruppen, because they were not ordered by Himmler. Lange's experience in the mass killing of Poles during Operation Tannenberg was the reason why Ernst Damzog, the Commander of Sicherheitspolizei (Security Police) and SD stationed in occupied Poznań (Posen) placed him in charge of the SS-Sonderkommando Lange (special detachment) for the purpose of mass gassing operations which led to the eventual annihilation of the Łódź Ghetto.

See also
Nazi crimes against the Polish nation
Intelligenzaktion
Special Prosecution Book-Poland
Intelligenzaktion Pommern
Valley of Death
Katyn massacre
Gestapo–NKVD conferences (1939–1940)
Pacification operations in German-occupied Poland
Operation Himmler
Anti-Polonism
History of Poland (1939–1945)
Genocide
Wawelberg Group

Notes
Footnotes and references
Bibliography
Verbatim transcript of Part I of the book  The German New Order in Poland published for the Polish Ministry of Information by Hutchinson & Co., London, in late 1941. The period covered by the book is September, 1939 to June, 1941.

Further reading
Chrzanowski, Bogdan; Ciechanowski, Konrad; Drywa, Danuta; Ferenc, Ewa; Gąsiorowski, Andrzej; Gliński, Mirosław; Grabowska, Janina; Grot, Elżbieta; Orski, Marek; Steyer, Krzysztof (2000). Monografia obozu KL Stutthof [KL Stutthof Monograph] (in Polish). Państwowe Muzeum Stutthof w Sztutowie. Archived from the original (Internet Archive) on 2009-01-22. Organization, Prisoners, Subcamps, Extermination, Responsibility.
Jean Maridor, La Station de Radiodiffusion de Gleiwitz (Gliwice) - L'Opération TANNENBERG. (in French)
Szcześniak, Andrzej Leszek (2001). Plan zagłady Słowian - Generalplan OST [Plan of Extermination of the Slavs - Generalplan OST]. Radom: Polwen. ISBN 83-88822-03-9.
Spiess, Alfred; Lichtenstein, Heiner (1989). Unternehmen Tannenberg. Der Anlass zum Zweiten Weltkrieg. Korrigierte und erweiterte Ausgabe [Operstion Tannenberg The cause of the Second World War. Corrected and Expanded edition]. Ullstein-Buch (Nr. 33118: Zeitgeschichte). Frankfurt/M, Berlin: Ullstein. ISBN 3-548-33118-1.