Dr. Robert M. Ricketts (May 5, 1920 – June 17, 2003) was an American orthodontist known for many contributions in the field of orthodontics. Most important contributions were related to his development of Ricketts' Cephalometric Analysis  and an .018-inch slot in an orthodontic bracket. His research focused on the growth and structural variation of the face and jaws.

Life
Ricketts was born in Kokomo, Indiana into a poor family. In his early childhood years, his family's farming business was devastated by the Great Depression of the 1920s. After high school, he worked as a laborer in a steel mill factory and a radio factory for one year. He obtained his dental degree from Indiana University School of Dentistry in 1945. He then joined the U.S. Navy as a dentist for two years and eventually went to the University of Illinois to study orthodontics under Dr. Allan G. Brodie. He obtained his master's degree in 1947.
He was a professor at many universities in the world, including Loma Linda University, University of Illinois at Chicago, University of Southern California. During his lifetime, he was member of 17 professional societies and gave over 100 lectures all over the world about orthodontics. In 1981, he founded the American Institute for Bioprogressive Education.
He retired at the age of 72 and moved to Scottsdale, Arizona in 1992. He died at the age of 83 in 2003. Ricketts was married twice and was survived by four children: Robin, Gale, Craig, and Anastar.

Orthodontics
Ricketts' contributions in orthodontics started in the 1950s. During that era, doctors Alan Brodie and Holly Broadbent Sr. believed in using cephalometric radiographs for longitudinal studies rather than clinical applications. Ricketts' views were contrary.  He published two papers in 1960 in which he showed his work of using cephalometric X-rays on 1000 patients in his clinic. Some of his contributions to the field of orthodontics were

the first straight wire bracket .018 inch slot, in 1970
cephalometric analysis, which allowed clinicians to compare their patients with norms based on age, sex, and race
the first cephalometric system to forecast treatment result plus growth in treatment planning (developed with Carl F. Gugino)
pentamorphine arches, which are five different arch forms individualized to different patients
root ratings based upon the works of Miura and Lee to quantify the forces necessary to move teeth in any plane of space
Ricketts' Utility Arch
computerized cephalometric analysis
the concept of bioprogressive philosophy (developed with Carl Gugino and Ruel Bench)Ricketts published over 30 books. Nine of his books (3 volumes) concerned cranio-facial orthopedics. He also wrote a personal narrative called The Reappearing American that was published in 1993.

Bioprogressive therapy
Ricketts developed the bioprogressive philosophy which stated that a face should be treated as a whole, rather than focusing one's attention on just teeth and occlusion. This philosophy involves over 100 principles that are divided into the "four" sciences known as Social, Biological, Clinical, and Mechanical. Some of the principles of this philosophy includes:

the importance of diagnosis and treatment in orthodontics, with the application of the Visual Treatment Objective (VTO) and evaluating anchorage control during the therapy
torque control throughout treatment, which leads to more efficient treatment
muscular and cortical bone anchorage
proper application of pressure in relation to movement of teeth in various direction
treatment of overbite before the overjet
sectional arch treatment, in which treatment in one arch can be broken down into various segments
overtreatment in order to overcome the tendency of relapse
pre-fabricated appliances, which allows clinicians to focus more time delivering the appliance than constructing it

Morganics
In the 1950s, Ricketts was the first person in United States to prescribe nutritional supplements in his orthodontic and orthopedic practice. Later, he developed a nutritional community and eventually, due to his contributions in the field of microbiology and chemistry, the Morganics Nutrition Supplement was developed. The company Morganics was founded in 1993 and is currently based in Phoenix, Arizona.

Awards and recognitions
Diplomate of American Board of Orthodontics
Merit Award - American Society of Dentistry for Children
William Cogswell Distinguished Service Award in Oral Surgery
Albert H. Ketcham Award in 1975
John Mershon Lecturer in 1976
Associated Journals of Europe Award in 1983
Strang Award - Connecticut State Society of Orthodontics
Joe Peak Honor lecturer in 1999 at the Southwestern Society of Orthodontics Annual Session
Waldron Lecturer Award - American Society of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons

Positions
Rocky Mountain Data Systems - Vice President and Director of Research
American Institute for Bioprogressive Education - Founder

See also
Anchorage (orthodontics)
American Board of Orthodontics


== References ==