Sarah Burgess (born October 4, 1980) is an Australian professional racing driver and crew chief. She has experience in multiple disciplines such as drifting, rallycross, short course off-road racing, and stock car racing.

Racing career
Early career and drifting
Burgess' interest in motorsports stemmed from watching Formula One races with her English-born father. She and husband Adam ran an automotive and machining business and fielded drag racing cars in Australia before moving to the United States in 2008; her interest in the auto industry started eight years prior when she visited the country for business and attended the NHRA Winternationals.The Burgess family started BMI Racing to manufacture parts for clients in addition to competing in drifting. In 2011, Burgess ran two rounds of the Xtreme Drift Circuit in BMI's Mazda RX-8. After Mazda discontinued the car, the team purchased a Ford Mustang in an auction for the 2012 season. By that year, Burgess was the only female driver competing nationally in drifting.

Off-road racing
In 2014, Burgess entered Global Rallycross in a Chevrolet Sonic for BMI. Royal Purple followed her to rallycross after previously sponsoring her drifting team, while she had factory support from Chevrolet but continued to run BMI as a privateeer. The team elected to skip the season opener in Barbados to continue developing the car and scheduled Burgess' debut for X Games Austin. However, a mechanical problem in testing forced her to abandon the attempt. Had the start happened, Burgess would have been the second female driver in GRC history after Emma Gilmour, who debuted earlier that year. She tried again at Daytona International Speedway, where she formed Chevrolet's first multi-car effort alongside Pat Moro, but did not run any of the weekend's races following qualifying.Dissatisfied with disciplines that she felt were not enticing enough for fans, she moved to the Lucas Oil Off Road Racing Series in 2015. She initially planned to race in the Pro 4 class before settling on Pro Lite as it allowed her to "get in the truck at a reasonable expense and just learn the processes and understand the way things are done." In an October interview with LOORRS, she explained there was little overlap in driving styles between drifting and short course off-road, with "the only relation" being in "initial entry (into a turn). It doesn't carry over into anything else, so (it's been a matter of) learning how a track changes every lap and how different setups on a truck can change it and, of course, making sure the truck just stays running to start with." Burgess ran seven races in her first season.Burgess acquired sponsorship from Axalta ahead of the 2019 season.

ARCA Menards Series West
Burgess serves as crew chief and owner for her daughter Bridget in the ARCA Menards Series West. With a lack of funding compared to the top teams in the series, Burgess has often been Bridget's only pit crew member; she once changed all four tires on Bridget's car by herself during a pit stop.Burgess has also expressed interest in joining Bridget in a West Series race as a driver. In March 2022, Burgess obtained her ARCA license after completing some test laps in Bridget's car when the series visited Irwindale Speedway. She nearly made her debut in the following day's NAPA Auto Parts 150 as a replacement driver for Eric Nascimento. Burgess qualified 15th of 16 cars; however, just prior to the green flag, the team withdrew from the event. In April, Burgess revealed she was still searching for sponsorship to allow her to compete in a race when the series returned to Irwindale later in the summer. Burgess eventually picked up sponsorship from eBay Motors for the Las Vegas Motor Speedway Bullring race on October 14, finishing in 17th place with Bridget five spots ahead in 12th.

Personal life
During her youth, Burgess played sports like BMX racing, kayaking, and speed skating on both ice and inline. In ice speed skating, she represented Australia three times in the World Junior Speed Skating Championships. She met her husband Adam, who ran a bread delivery company in Brisbane, at a business banquet in 1999.Outside of driving, she has worked for SEMA in the marketing department. Her daughter Bridget drives in the ARCA Menards Series West for BMI Racing.

Motorsports career results
Career summary
Off-road
Complete Global RallyCross Championship results
Supercar
ARCA Menards Series
(key) (Bold – Pole position awarded by qualifying time. Italics – Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * – Most laps led.)

ARCA Menards Series West
References
External links
Sarah Burgess driver statistics at Racing-Reference
Sarah Burgess crew chief statistics at Racing-Reference