Adrienne Maloof (born September 4, 1961) is an American businesswoman, television personality, shoe designer, and co-owner of the various business holdings of Maloof Companies, which include a stake in the Sacramento Kings (NBA), the Vegas Golden Knights (NHL), The Palms Casino Resort in Las Vegas, Nevada; Maloof Productions, Maloof Music and the retired Maloof Money Cup skateboarding event.

Early life and education
Adrienne Maloof is of Lebanese and Irish heritage. A member of the Maloof family, she is the third child and only daughter of billionaire entrepreneur George J. Maloof Sr., whose wife Colleen co-owns the holdings of the Maloof Companies with Adrienne and her brothers, George J. Maloof Jr., Joe Maloof, Gavin Maloof, and Phil Maloof. She was born on September 4, 1961, in Albuquerque, New Mexico, where her father owned a Coors beer distributorship. She attended the University of New Mexico on a full scholarship as a tennis player, where she earned a degree in political science and was a member of Pi Beta Phi sorority.

Career
After working in the marketing and promotions department of the Maloof family's liquor and wine business, her role grew to encompass the interests of all Maloof Companies and she has continued to control much of the Maloof Companies' marketing operations for more than twenty years. She is also involved in setting customer service standards for all Maloof Companies, including brother George Jr.'s Palms Casino Resort in Las Vegas, and she has produced many of Maloof Productions' projects, including the 2005 horror film Feast.She was a cast member for the first three seasons of Bravo's The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills, part of the network's Real Housewives series, alongside Kim and Kyle Richards, Camille Grammer, Lisa Vanderpump, Brandi Glanville, and Taylor Armstrong. On March 4, 2013, Maloof announced she would be leaving the TV series, but has made guest appearances in the series' fifth, sixth, eighth, and tenth season.In December 2011, she released Adrienne Maloof by Charles Jourdan, a small shoe collection produced by Charles Jourdan.

Philanthropy
Outside of work, Maloof dedicates much of her time to philanthropy. She has supported numerous charities, including School On Wheels, Good News Foundation, and Camp Kindness program with the Sacramento SPCA.

Personal life
On May 2, 2002, she married otolaryngologist Paul Nassif, who specializes in facial surgery—specifically rhinoplasty. The couple have three sons. They resided in Beverly Park, a gated community in Los Angeles. Nassif filed for separation from her on July 30, 2012. The papers, filed in Los Angeles Superior Court, cited irreconcilable differences as the reason for the separation. On November 8, 2012, their divorce was settled.
On January 22, 2013, Maloof confirmed that she was formally dating Sean Stewart—son of British rocker Rod Stewart. Maloof rented Tom Gores' house in Mulholland Estates in 2012, and it was purchased by Christina Aguilera in 2013.

Filmography
References
External links
 Media related to Adrienne Maloof at Wikimedia Commons
Official website