According to the Worldwide Cost of Living 2020  report issued by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU), Singapore, Hong Kong, and Osaka share the title of costliest city in the world. The list was prepared based on their Worldwide Cost of Living (WCOL) Index scores. The Worldwide Cost of Living survey was done in order to compare the cost of living indices in cities all over the world.

. Most expensive land is in Sarhind (Punjab) India, District fatehgar sahib. This world’s most expensive land was brought by Diwaan Todar Mal Jain. Diwan Todalmal had to pay 78000 gold coins for 4squre meter. The weight of that gold was 7.8 tons.
Date 26 December 1705  baba Fateh Singh ji and Baba Jorawar Singh ji two brave sons of  Guru Govind Singh ji were killed in the fort of sarhind by Wajir Khan.
Diwan Todar Mal Jain was a very big businessman of that time. He was devot of Guru Govind Singh ji. He ask wajir khan for body of  baba Fateh Singh ji and Baba Jorawar Singh ji and mother of Guru Govind Singh ji for funeral. Wajir khan was a very cunning person. He told diwan todarmal that you need to purchase the land for the funeral.

Methodology
The list has been created based on the Worldwide Cost of Living data set. The data set comprises 400 individual prices of 160 products and services across 130 cities in 90 countries. Data set was created covering a wide range of products including food and beverage to household supplies,  personal care items to clothing. Services includes home rents to transport, utility bills and private schools to domestic help. The prices of commodities are gathered from three types of stores: supermarket, medium-priced retailers and more expensive specialty shops. Only those outlets were considered where the quality of the products are comparable to international standards. The prices of the services like house rents, transportation charges depends on several factors such as personal preferences and variety of choices. Therefore, the prices of these services are based on actual prices noted by the researchers. 
The prices were compared considering the New York as base city and all the prices were US dollars with the appropriate exchange rates at the time of survey

The top 10 costliest cities in September 2021
Price comparison for 10 years until 2020
The price of 1kg loaf of bread [All prices are in USD] 


== References ==