Rodney "Don Vito" Richard (born July 9, 1978) is an American record producer. He is best known as the producer who collaborated with Kandi Burruss on projects portrayed on The Real Housewives of Atlanta, including Kim Zolciak's breakout single "Tardy for the Party". He also worked as a judge on The Kandi Factory airing on Bravo, and as executive producer for Burruss' weekly webisode series Kandi Koated Nights.

Personal life
Don Vito was born on July 9, 1978, in Gary, Indiana to Louis and Juanita Richard. While in high school, he learned the art of DJing and would perform at school dances and local house parties. After being discharged from the Marine Corps, Vito moved to Atlanta, Georgia.
On August 21, 2013, Don Vito and his girlfriend, LaTavia Roberson, formerly of Destiny's Child, welcomed a daughter named Lyric. The pair welcomed son Londyn on September 23, 2019.

Music career
Vito was introduced to record producer, DJ Cooley C, who gave him the opportunity to work with hip hop artists Ghetto Mafia and Kilo. He later met Ian Burke who introduced him to rapper Solé, signed to RedZone Entertainment. Tricky Stewart then signed him to Redzone, and he started working with Solé and artists such as Mya and Blu Cantrell. Less than four years later, Don Vito ventured out with R&B group Cherish. In 2005, he launched Don Vito Productions, a music and video production company.

Discography
Credits
Singles
Awards and nominations
2010, BMI, Nomination Special Background Performance Cue
2007, Songwriter Award, (Cherish - "Do It to It")
2023, Songwriter Award, (Acraze feat. Cherish - "Do It to It")

See also
"Tardy for the Party" lawsuit

References
External links
Meet Superstar Producer Don Vito, Freddyo.com
Real Housewife of Atlanta Kim Zolciak Being Sued By Music Producer, Radaronline.com
Cast of Kandi Koated Nights, Straigftfromthea.com
Yung Joc Album Review, XXL, xxlmag.com
The One, Hip Hop MVP.com
Soundcheck, Soultrain.com
A&R, Learnthemusicindustry.com
Don Vito Celebrity Judge, BET's 106 & Park
The Kandi Factory is Worth Visiting, Kandi Factory