George Joseph Maloof Jr. (born September 2, 1964) is an American entrepreneur and businessman. He is the former owner of the Sacramento Kings, the former owner of the now defunct Sacramento Monarchs, and was minority owner of the Palms Casino Resort in Las Vegas with his brothers Gavin Maloof, Joe Maloof, Phil Maloof, and sister Adrienne Maloof. He is part of the Maloof family.

Life and career
Maloof is of Lebanese and Irish descent. He was born and raised in Albuquerque, New Mexico, where his father, George Sr., operated a Coors beer distributorship. He attended the University of Nevada, Las Vegas where he studied casino management. He graduated Class of 1987 and was a member of the Kappa-Alpha Chapter of the Kappa Sigma fraternity. While at UNLV, Maloof played cornerback for the Runnin' Rebels football team. Death Row Records co-founder Suge Knight was his locker mate.Maloof is the leading force behind the building and operation of the Palms Casino Resort just off Flamingo Road in Las Vegas, Nevada.  He has overseen the operation of hotels throughout the Southwest and California, including the Fiesta hotel-casino in North Las Vegas, the Central Palace Casino in Central City, Colorado, and the Palms.
Maloof opened his first casino in Central City, Colorado, before returning to Las Vegas to open the Fiesta in 1994. He then built the 430-room Palms resort in 2001 with family money. The hotel, which accrues more than $50 million in annual profits, boasts stripper poles in private rooms, the Real World Suite (home to MTV's reality series) and an emphasis on hiring beautiful women. "If you have the girls, you are going to get the guys," Maloof once said. The Palms has hosted the MTV Video Music Awards, NBA All-Star weekend and the Ocean's 13 premiere.The Maloof family helped finance the horror film Feast. The four brothers have also filmed a series of Carl's Jr. commercials, which began airing on October 16, 2006.

Filmography
References
Further reading
Biography of George Maloof Jr. at IMDB.com
Celebrity Week
NBA.com
Entrepreneur.com

External links
George Maloof at IMDb
George Maloof Jr. at tv.com Archived 2019-05-20 at the Wayback Machine
George Maloof Jr. at hollywood.com