Kevin Roshon Samuels (March 13, 1969 – May 5, 2022) was an American internet personality and image consultant. He rose to popularity in 2020 and was considered a public figure based on his YouTube and Instagram live streams discussing modern society and relationships.

Early life
Kevin Samuels was born in Oklahoma City. He attended Millwood High School, and studied chemical engineering at the University of Oklahoma, but was not able to graduate due to having cancer at age 21.

Career
Samuels worked in the marketing industry before starting his own image-consulting firm in 2013. He accumulated 1.4 million subscribers on YouTube, 1.2 million followers on Instagram and thousands on several other online platforms like Twitter and TikTok. The New York Times wrote he built an image as a "plain-spoken, hypermasculine authority" who advocated for "strict gender roles" in which men assumed predominance.Samuels gained traction in mainstream hip-hop culture, interviewing Nicki Minaj and T.I., while also making guest appearances on No Jumper, Joe Budden TV and VladTV. In 2022, Samuels made a cameo appearance on the television series Atlanta in the episode "Rich Wigga, Poor Wigga". In February 2022, Samuels appeared in a music video in which he acted as a therapist and dating coach for rapper Future on the single "Worst Day". He also interviewed popular Instagram models like Brittany Renner, and reality TV stars like Tommie Lee. Several prominent guests such as Minaj, Marlon Wayans, and Tamar Braxton showed support for his work.Samuels' comments on men and women were sometimes controversial. As an image consultant, he often asked women who called his show asking for dating advice to rate themselves based on what he called the perceived sexual market place value for dating. He then critiqued women based on age, dress size, height and weight according to his perception of their sexual market place value. He stressed a belief that some women had unrealistically high standards for the types of men they should be dating, while also criticizing men for being poor or overweight. In addition, he strongly criticized the black community for failing to meet traditional values, especially concerning its high out-of-wedlock birth rate and relatively low marriage rate. Samuels' critics decried him as being actively misogynoir, and a part of the Black manosphere, whereas his supporters defended him as an advocate for traditional values.

Personal life and death
Samuels was married and divorced twice. He had a daughter.On May 5, 2022, Samuels was found unresponsive in his Atlanta apartment after a woman who had stayed with him the night prior called 911, telling the operator Samuels was complaining of chest pains and that he had collapsed. Samuels was rushed to a hospital, where he later died. According to the medical examiner's report Samuels had hypertension, which contributed to his death.

Impressions and tributes
American comedian Affion Crockett had a regular show on his YouTube channel playing a character called Devin R. Samuels which was a comedic impression of Kevin Samuels. Crockett often used the same mannerisms, phrases, and styles of communicating that Samuels had on his show.[21]Bulgarian music producer ORLI ANROW did a tribute song in memory of Kevin Samuels, named "Young Kevin Samuels". The producer had similar attire as Samuels in the music video and also used expressions that Samuels did on his show. The song included a sample from Kevin Samuels, who is also credited as a writer of the song.

References
External links
Kevin Samuels at IMDb