Zack Bialobos (born June 9, 1996) is an American producer, DJ, and record executive. He was first known in the Los Angeles nightlife scene in the late 2010s as a party promoter and DJ. Later a co-founder of Field Trip Recordings, he signed notable artists including Yeat, SSGKobe, and Slump6s.

Early life
Zachary Bialobos was born on June 9, 1996, in New York City to Laura and Philippe Bialobos. His parents split when he was 8, and he was raised by his mother as a result. Bia's mother would expose him to music and magazine culture at a young age.  When he was 8 or 9 he made money by downloading music onto people's iPods. He graduated from Beverly Hills High School in 2014.

Career
2015–2017
On Bia's 19th birthday, while attending the University of Southern California, he visited a Los Angeles nightclub for the first time. Rapper Fetty Wap was also there, and he invited Bia and his friends to party with them. Following the party, a promoter asked for Bia's number, assuming he was a member of Fetty Wap's entourage. Bia used his supposed association with Wap to bring his college classmates to parties once a week, for which  he was paid $100.  John Terzian, founder of the H.Wood Group, later hired him. In 2017, after hosting and DJing parties and dinners at the nightclub Delilah, Bia befriended musician Drake. He then cameoed in Drake's music video for "Money in the Grave", which garnered speculation as to who he was. Bia is also mentioned in French Montana and Drake's song “No Stylist.” A viral video released around the time includes the punchline: “The DMV has the only line in LA where saying ‘I’m with Zack Bia’ won't help you." During an episode of Apple Music Radio’s Zane Lowe Show a host said: “There’s nothing more Hollywood than name-dropping Zack Bia.”

2018–present
In 2018, Bia co-founded Field Trip Recordings. He has since signed rappers Yeat, SSGKobe, Slump6s, HVN and OnlyBino, and singers Mallory Merk and Max Drazen, all of whom are jointly signed with major record labels.In 2020, Bia's virtual DJ sets became popular as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, during which he hosted Quarantine DJ Sets on Instagram Live. His guests included Kendall Jenner, Bella Hadid, Joan Smalls, Tinashe, Luka Sabbat, Virgil Abloh, and Drake,  who had Bia debut his song “Toosie Slide” during the set.In 2022, Bia joined Post Malone on his Twelve Carat Toothache Tour as an opening act on 31 dates of the tour.  He was booked to provide a DJ set on dates that Roddy Rich was absent from.In early 2023 Bia released the single "Hardcore" (feat. Don Toliver) and  "One Of Those Days" (feat. Lil Yachty and 347aidan). 
He released "High" (with DJ Gummy Bear).

Collaborations and appearances
Bia appeared as himself in the basketball video game NBA2K21.In 2022, Bia teamed up with Asics for a GEL-KAYANO 14 collaboration  to celebrate the launch of his independent record label, Field Trip Recordings.
Bia also collaborated with Beats by Dre to create a pair of speakers which say “past” and “present”.
In April 2023, Bia promoted his collaboration with  with Nike alongside Field Trip Recordings and Verdy. The shoes have the Field Trip Recordings logo along with “Ch1” and “Ch2” on the left and right shoe respectively.

Personal life
Bia has had relationships with Madison Beer, and Olivia Rodrigo.He met Virgil Abloh in 2017 and cites him as his mentor and friend.

Field Trip Recordings
Field Trip Recordings, LLC is an American record label originally founded on April 25, 2017, in Los Angeles by James Canton.  Bia later joined as a co-founder in 2018. The label launched in 2020.The label has signed rappers Yeat, SSGKobe, Slump6s, HVN and OnlyBino, as well as singers Mallory Merk and Max Drazen, all of whom are joint-ventures with the label among various major record labels.

Roster


== References ==