Joan of Évreux (French: Jeanne d'Évreux; 1310 – 4 March 1371) was Queen of France and Navarre as the third wife of King Charles IV of France.

Life
She was the daughter of Louis, Count of Évreux and Margaret of Artois. Because Joan was Charles's first cousin, the couple required papal permission to marry, which they obtained from Pope John XXII. They had three daughters, Jeanne, Marie and Blanche, who were unable to inherit the throne under principles of Salic law. The royal couple's lack of sons caused the end of the direct line of the Capetian dynasty.Joan died on 4 March 1371 in her château at Brie-Comte-Robert, in the Île-de-France region, some twenty miles southeast of Paris. She was buried at the Basilica of St Denis, the necropolis of the Kings of France.

Legacy
Two of Joan's remarkable possessions survive: her book of hours and a statue of the Virgin and Child. The Book of Hours, known as the  Hours of Jeanne d'Evreux, is in The Cloisters collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. It was commissioned from the artist Jean Pucelle between 1324 and 1328, probably as a gift from her husband.  The book contains the usual prayers of the canonical hours as arranged for the laity along with the notable inclusion of the office dedicated to St Louis, her great-grandfather. The small statue of the Virgin and Child (gilded silver and enamel, 69 cm high), which Jeanne left to the monastery of St Denis outside Paris, is in the Louvre Museum.

References
Sources
d'Avray, David (2015). Papacy, Monarchy and Marriage 860–1600. Cambridge University Press.
Benton, Janetta Rebold (2009). Materials, Methods, and Masterpieces of Medieval Art. Praeger Publishers.
Keane, Marguerite (2016). Material Culture and Queenship in 14th-century France: The Testament of Blanche of Navarre (1331-1398). Brill.
Pernoud, Regine; Clin, Narue-Veronique (1999). Wheeler, Bonnie (ed.). Joan of Arc: Her Story. Translated by Adams, Jeremy duQuesnay. St. Martin's Press.
Suger (2018). Selected Works of Abbot Suger of Saint Denis. Catholic University of America Press.
Warner, Kathryn (2017). Isabella of France: The Rebel Queen. Amberley Publishing.
Woodacre, Elena (2013). The Queens Regnant of Navarre: Succession, Politics, and Partnerships, 1274-1512. Palgrave Macmillan.

External links

The Hours of Jeanne d'Evreux at the Cloisters