Sonya McLaughlin Halpern (born October 11, 1967) is an American politician and former advertising sales executive, renowned for her commitment to economic and social innovation. As a State Senator for the Georgia State Senate representing the 39th district, she represents some of the most socioeconomically diverse neighborhoods of Atlanta, City of South Fulton, College Park, East Point, and Union City since her election in December 2020.
Halpern emerged as a political figure in the special Democratic primary election to succeed (now-Congresswoman) Nikema Williams, winning in a runoff election with 81% of the vote, after securing a 20-point lead over her closest challenger in the primary. During her second term, Senator Halpern has sponsored more than 20 bills that have since become state law.
Elected by her colleagues as Vice Chair of the Senate Democratic Caucus, she plays a key role in shaping the Democratic party's strategies, policies, and legislative agenda within the Senate. She was elected Co-Chair of the Fulton County Delegation, the largest legislative delegation in the Georgia General Assembly, for the 2023/2024 biennium after previously serving as Vice Chair.
Additionally, Halpern has received appointments to several state boards/commissions including the Georgia Technology Authority, Georgia High School Athletic Association Overview Committee and the Georgia World Congress Center Authority Overview Committee.
Halpern was named to the Nominations Committee of the National Black Caucus of State Legislators as well as to the Government Oversight and Fiscal Affairs Committee of the Council on State Governments/South.

Political career
Since swearing in on January 11, 2021, Senator Sonya Halpern has a number of committee appointments:

Vice Chair, Urban Affairs Committee: Addresses the unique challenges faced by Georgia's urban areas, advocating for policies that promote development and equality.
Member, Appropriations Committee: Decides on the allocation of funds for various state departments and agencies.
Member, Appropriations Subcommittee, Government Operations and Transportation: Subcommittee which addresses budgetary specifics of government operations and transportation, respectively, ensuring efficient use of taxpayer money.
Member, Banking and Financial Institutions Committee: Legislation and regulations concerning the state's financial institutions, aiming to foster an environment conducive to economic growth and consumer protection.
Member, Education and Youth Committee: Improves Georgia's education system and advocating for youth-oriented policies.
Member, Health and Human Services Committee: Shapes health and human services policy, with a focus on improving Georgia's health disparities and infrastructure—a key pillar of her policy platform.
Chairwoman, Study Committee on Excellence, Innovation, and Technology at HBCUs: Focuses on the  role of HBCUs in fostering excellence, innovation, and technology within the higher education sector.
Member, Secretary of State’s GA WORKS (Growing All Workforce Opportunities by Remaking the Scope of Licensing) Commission: Invited to by Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger to serve on this inaugural commission which is focused on meeting the needs of a growing state by reducing bureaucratic barriers to employment in the licensing process.
Member, Study Committee on Expanding Georgia’s Workforce: Proactively exploring new ways to train and recruit Georgia talent to meet the growing needs of a dynamic economy while working with businesses to adopt practices that keep the best talent in Georgia.
Member, Study Committee on Occupational Licensing: Appointed by Lieutenant Governor Burt Jones, ensures that the state provides transparency and fairness in the occupational licensing process.
Member, Study Committee on Local Option Sales Tax: Negotiates this revenue source for city and county governments works to benefit the interests of the local taxpayers.
Member, Joint Study Committee on Georgia Music Heritage: Examines the economic impact and growth opportunities for the music industry, productions and music tourism sector.
Member, Joint Study Committee on Airport Infrastructure and Improvements: Explores policy and funding mechanisms needed to support the critical infrastructure in the movement of goods and persons by air.

Atlanta Mayoral Elections
Halpern has served several high-profile political figures in Atlanta, most notably serving as a member of Mayor M. Kasim Reed’s Transition Team in 2010. She also went on to oversee and manage the inaugurations of Atlanta mayors M. Kasim Reed in 2014 and Keisha Lance Bottoms in 2018. Serving as both the Executive Producer and Co-chair of the Inaugural Committee for both these key events, Halpern was part of the planning, production, and execution of multiple inaugural festivities including the solemn swearing-in ceremonies for the Mayor, the Atlanta City Council, and the Municipal Court of Atlanta.

Business career
Halpern has worked in communications, advertising, and marketing. She worked in advertising sales at The Walt Disney Company, ESPN, and Cox Enterprises. She has also been a member of various boards and non-profits.
In 2019, Sen. Halpern founded Whiskey in a Teacup. This arts and cultural consultancy and communications firm reflects her commitment to the arts and her ability to harness strategic communications to promote cultural and community engagement.

Arts and Creative Industry Advocacy
Halpern's work ranges from local cultural initiatives to national board engagements, all aimed at amplifying the importance of the arts in shaping resilient, inclusive, and vibrant societies.
Appointed by President Barack Obama in 2011 to the President's Advisory Committee on the Arts, she became the first African American and the first Georgian to serve as chair  of this prestigious national board of the John F. Kennedy Center for Performing Arts in Washington DC.
In 2012, Halpern spearheaded efforts and became the sole fundraiser for the Congressman John Lewis Mural, the famous public art installation honoring the late Congressman in Downtown Atlanta.
In 2013, she was unanimously elected Chair of the National Black Arts Festival, the country’s longest-running multi-disciplinary arts institution exclusively focused on artists of African descent.
She serves on the Board of Directors for South Arts. South Arts is one of the nation’s six regional arts organizations, and a partner to the National Endowment for the Arts.
Halpern has served as an Advisory Board Member of the DeVos Institute of Arts Management at the University of Maryland since 2015. The Devos Institute of Arts Management is a prominent management consulting practice and has worked with arts managers and their boards in over 1000 organizations across 80 countries.

Education Advocacy
Sen. Halpern's took on the role of Chair of the Board of Trustees at The Children's School and serves on the Executive Committee of the Board of Directors at the YMCA of Metro Atlanta, which is the largest provider of early learning/childcare in the region through Head Start or Early Head Start Services. As one of the founding executive members of the Atlanta School for the Arts Foundation, a public arts professional preparatory high school - which would be the first of its kind in the city of Atlanta - to empower Atlanta’s next generation of artists, arts leaders, and arts patrons with the skills, networks, and experiences they need.

Civic Engagement
Senator Halpern is a current member of the NAACP. Other engagements include:

Member, League of Women Voters
Member, National Council of Negro Women
Member, African American Leadership Council of the Democratic National Committee
Founding Executive member, Atlanta School for the Arts Foundation
Founding Co-chair, Electing Women Alliance Atlanta Chapter
Host committee, "Pass on Blessings" Awards, Andrew J. Young Foundation
Grant Panelist/Art Works I, National Endowment for the Arts
Member, Jack and Jill Inc/Atlanta chapter
Mayoral Appointee, Atlanta Judicial Commission
Women's Solidarity Society member, National Center for Civil and Human Rights

Awards
Senator Sonya Halpern's journey in public service, business, and civic engagement has been recognized with a host of awards. Her honors include:

2023 Hunt Kean Institute Fellow: One of 30 political leaders from across the country selected for the 2023 cohort due to her demonstrated focus on cultivating a smart and effective education agenda.
Legislative Award Honor Roll, Georgia Association of Educators, 2021 and 2022
Recipient of the Renee Montgomery Award, an inaugural award presented in 2022 by women’s basketball legend Renee Montgomery Foundation spotlighting the extraordinary work of community leaders.
2022 Beloved Community Member MLK Awards, University of Hartford: Recognized for her contributions toward creating a beloved community, the university acknowledged her work to improve her community, city, and the world.
Council on State Government/Southern Legislative Conference, Center for the Advancement of Leadership Skills: Chosen for the Class of 2021 cohort championing excellence in state government and enhancing leadership skills.
Best Dressed Lawmakers of 2021, Atlanta Journal Constitution: Highlighted as one of the top 10 most stylish lawmakers of the Georgia General Assembly
2021 Anchor Awards, University of Hartford Outstanding Alum: Recognized for an her significant contributions towards Social Responsibility and Civic Engagement, the university celebrated her commitment to enriching communities and fostering change.
Synchronicity Theater’s Women in the Arts & Business Honoree 2020: Honoring her commitment to the Atlanta arts community
YMCA’s 2019 Volunteer of the Year: This honor acknowledges Sen. Halpern's tireless dedication and invaluable service towards enriching the lives of community members through the YMCA of Metro Atlanta.
"Top 100 Black Women of Influence" by the Atlanta Business League: This distinction underlines her significant influence and leadership role as a Black woman in business, politics, and community service.
"Woman of Achievement" by the YWCA of Greater Atlanta: Honored for her commitment to improving women's lives, advocating for their rights, and working towards gender equity.
State Senate Resolution (SR 861)  sponsored by Senator Nikema Williams: Recognized for her exemplary servant leadership, this resolution commemorates her impact and dedication to her constituents and the state.
Recipient of the Nikki T Randall Servant Leadership Award from the GA Legislative Women’s Caucus: Honoring her outstanding commitment to servant leadership, the award underscores her dedication to leading by serving others.
The "Sandra Anderson Bacchus Legacy Award" from the National Black Arts Festival: This honor commemorates Sen. Halpern's contributions to the arts and her work in promoting and preserving the rich artistic contributions of the African Diaspora.
BMW of North America’s "Women Who Pay It 4ward" in 2017: This distinction celebrates Sen. Halpern as a diverse woman trailblazer, acknowledging her inspiring leadership and transformative contributions in her fields.

Public Appearances
In May 2023, Halpern delivered commencement addresses at Albany State University and Savannah State University - both esteemed Georgia Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). She is the first elected official in the Georgia General Assembly to deliver commencement addresses to two schools within the University System of Georgia in the same graduation year. Other public appearances include:

Opening welcome, YMCA USA General Assembly National Conference (2023)
Keynote speaker, MLK Jr Day of Service, Nashville, TN (2022)
Guest panelist, GPB’s “Political Rewind” (2021, 2022, 2023)
Speaker, I Will Vote Gala, African American Leadership Council of the Democratic National Committee (2018)
Atlanta Roundtable Panelist, Creativity Connects: Trends and Conditions Affecting US Artists, National Endowment for the Arts (2016)
Panelist, International Arts Leaders Forum, John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (2014)

Media
Sonya Halpern has been a prominent figure in the media, contributing to various platforms from national news outlets like MSNBC to local newspapers such as The Atlanta Journal Constitution.
Here are notable features of Sonya Halpern in the media:

Atlanta News First, Senator Sonya’s Salute to Sisterhood (2023)
MSNBC Interview on Georgia politics; L.E.S.S. Crime Act (2022)
OpEd, Atlanta Journal Constitution “Some Truths About Crime in Atlanta” (2021)
Fox5 Atlanta, Senator Creates Crime Task Force (2021)
Profile, Give Atlanta, a supplement of Atlanta Magazine (2017)
UrbanGeekz: BMW celebrates diverse women trailblazers making a difference
Georgia Public Broadcasting: "Buckhead Cityhood Bill Makes No Sense," Fails in the Senate
Georgia Public Broadcasting: Sen. Sonya Halpern on her ride-along law enforcement
Albany Herald: State Senator Sonya Halpern to speak at ASU Commencement
Diverse Education: Report - Georgia's HBCUs could be made even stronger with state support
11 Alive: Senate Bill to create HBCU Prosperity Districts in Georgia
The Atlanta Voice: New bill aims to create HBCU prosperity planning districts
Saporta Report: Metro Atlanta sends Hall to Congress, Halpern to State Senate
On Common Ground News: Georgia Sen. Halpern, Gov. Kemp to celebrate HBCU Heritage Day, March 16
Kennedy Center: Sonya Halpern

Education
Halpern earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in mass communication from the University of Massachusetts Amherst and a Master of Business Administration from the Barney School of Business at the University of Hartford.

Personal life
Halpern and her husband, Daniel, have two sons  and a daughter. Halpern's husband is the co-founder and CEO of Jackmont Hospitality, one of the largest minority-owned foodservice management companies in the U.S. Jackmont Hospitality is based in the Atlanta metropolitan area.

References
External links
Profile at the Georgia State Senate