A significant number of attacks on healthcare facilities occurred during the 2023 Israel-Hamas war. During the first week of the war, there were 94 attacks on health care facilities in Israel and Gaza, killing 29 health care workers and injuring 24.

Background
Israel is alleged to have broken medical neutrality, a war crime under the Geneva Conventions. According to Gaza officials, the IDF deliberately targeted ambulances and health facilities with airstrikes. In a statement, the Palestine Red Crescent demanded "accountability for this war crime." The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, UNRWA, and Medecins Sans Frontieres reported the deaths of their medical personnel.

Attacks
Al-Ahli Arab Hospital
On 17 October 2023, an explosion took place in the parking lot of the courtyard of al-Ahli Arab Hospital in Gaza City during the war, resulting in a large number of fatalities and injuries among displaced Palestinians seeking shelter there.

Al-Shifa Hospital siege
Al-Shifa Hospital was under siege and bombing during the war. The hospital has been completely cut off from the rest of Gaza City, trapping 15,000 people who are either patients in need of treatment or have taken refuge in the hospital grounds.  Israel claims it is used as a military base by Hamas, a claim that Hamas denies.

Jerusalem Hospital
Jerusalem Hospital was also targeted during the war. Israel claimed the hospital was being used by Hamas for military purposes, a claim denied by Gaza health officials and Hamas.

Indonesian Hospital
An Indonesian hospital in Gaza, funded by Indonesian citizens and organizations, was struggling to treat patients injured in Israeli bombardment. Between dwindling drug stocks and blackouts that forced doctors to work in the dark.

Al-Quds Hospital
Al-Quds Hospital in Gaza City was hit several times and the Israeli army ordered its immediate evacuation. The World Health Organization has expressed deep concern over the situation.

Turkish-Palestinian Friendship Hospital
Turkish-Palestinian Friendship Hospital was also targeted during the war.

Jordan Field Hospital
The Jordan Field Hospital in Gaza, which has been operating since 2009, was badly affected during the conflict. The hospital faced an existential threat due to a lack of supplies during the Israeli bombardment. In response, the Jordanian Air Force sent emergency medical aid to the hospital. Despite these efforts, the hospital had to shut down operations due to continuous attacks.

Al-Shifa ambulance airstrike
An Israeli airstrike hit an ambulance convoy departing from al-Shifa Hospital carrying critically injured patients. The strike killed 15 people and wounded dozens, with the Palestine Red Crescent Society, which was part of the convoy, saying that all 15 casualties were civilians.

Al Awda Hospital
The World Health Organization (WHO) has strongly condemned Israel's repeated orders to evacuate al-Awda Hospital in northern Gaza, calling it a death sentence for the sick and wounded. More than 2,000 patients were forced to move to southern Gaza. This will worsen the current humanitarian and public health disaster.

Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani Hospital
The Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani Hospital for Rehabilitation and Prosthetics in Gaza has reported heavy damage as Israel continues to attack the besieged enclave.

UN Aid workers and other medical personnel
At least 88 people working for UNRWA, the United Nations agency for Palestinian refugees, have been killed since October 7. Medical personnel have also taken a heavy toll in the conflict, as the war has led to the deaths of many doctors due to Israeli airstrikes.

Casualties
So far, 198 medical personnel have been killed, and 87 ambulances have been damaged. In Gaza, 21 of 35 hospitals are closed, and 51 of 72 primary medical care facilities are closed.

Impact
Attacks on healthcare facilities have had devastating consequences for the population. Hospitals in Gaza are facing severe shortages of medical supplies amid Israel's total blockade. Hospitals are running on external generators – a backup that is heading into its last few hours. Israel has cut off water, electricity and fuel supplies, leaving 2.3 million people stranded. The World Health Organization has stressed the urgent need to end the violence and create a humanitarian corridor in the Gaza Strip.

Reactions
Health officials and medical organizations in the Gaza Strip accused Israel of deliberately bombing ambulances and health facilities in the besieged enclave. And said that these attacks are considered a violation of international laws that include such attacks in the list of war crimes.The Joint Arab-Islamic Summit urged the International Criminal Court's prosecutor to "thoroughly investigate the war crimes and crimes against humanity committed by Israel against the Palestinians."Human Rights Watch (HRW) said the attack on an ambulance near al-Shafa Hospital should be investigated as a possible war crime.President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has said that Turkey has "crossed out" Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and will refer Israel's human rights abuses and war crimes to the International Criminal Court (ICC).

See also
Russian strikes on hospitals during the Russian invasion of UkraineRussian–Syrian hospital bombing campaign


== References ==