Pradeep Adatrow is an Indian-American dental educator, researcher, and clinician. He is a board-certified Periodontist and Prosthodontists in the United States. He is an associate professor at the University of Tennessee.

Early life and education
He was born in Vizag, India and immigrated to the United States and grew up in Indianapolis, Indiana. Adatrow went to College at University of Alabama with a major in Epidemiology and Biostatistics. Later, he received a Doctor of Dental Surgery from the University of Tennessee, Memphis. Furthermore, he pursued a 3-year residency in Periodontics and Implant Dentistry at the Indiana University and another 3-year residency in Prosthodontics from the University of Tennessee, Memphis. He is board certified by American Academy of Periodontology and is inducted as a Fellow in International College of Dentistry.

Academic career
Adatrow's academic journey began as a Clinical Instructor at Indiana University, where he taught for three years. Subsequently, he transitioned to the University of Tennessee, initially as an Assistant Professor and later earning promotion to the position of associate professor. Over a span of 14 years at the University of Tennessee, Adatrow held various important roles, including Director of Doctoral Periodontics and Director of Surgical Prosthodontics, contributing significantly to the institution's academic and administrative endeavours.

Awards
He is board certified by the American Academy of Periodontology and is inducted as a Fellow in the International College of Dentistry. Subsequently, he was also inducted as a Fellow of the Academy of General Education. Adatrow also was inducted into the Deans Odonatological Society and Deans Society. for his in contributions to the teaching of dental students. He is also voted by his peers as the Top Dentist in the area.

Research
Adatrow and his Colleagues have carried out research on Chitosan and its use as a vehicle for bone regeneration.  He also has been researching the prevention of peri-implantitis using Biomaterial strategies to prevent or eliminate initial bacterial attachment. He also has done clinical studies looking into the viability of Mini Dental Implants for long term clinical use. Adatrow has co-authored several articles in peer-reviewed journals on bone regeneration using chitosan, peri-implantitis, small diameter implants (mini-implants).

References
External links
Pradeep Adatrow publications indexed by Google Scholar
Diplomate American Board of Periodontology
Fellow International College of Dentistry
Associate Professor, UTHSC
Publications
Wikihow Profile
Faculty Profile
Bizjournal Article
Yahoo News Article