The Surface is the fifth studio album by American rock band Beartooth. The album was released on October 13, 2023, through Red Bull Records and was produced by Caleb Shomo.

Background and promotion
On July 12, 2022, the band released the first single "Riptide" and an accompanying music video. On April 21, 2023, Beartooth unveiled the second single titled "Sunshine!". On July 21, the band released the third single "Might Love Myself" and its corresponding music video. At the same time, they officially announced the album itself and release date, whilst also revealing the album cover and the track list.On August 25, the band released the fourth single "Doubt Me" along with a music video. On September 15, one month before the album release, the band released the fifth single "The Better Me" featuring Hardy. The music video for "I Was Alive" was released October 13, 2023, coinciding with the album release.

Critical reception
The Surface received generally positive reviews from critics. Anne Erickson of Blabbermouth.net called The Surface "an engaging album that takes some twists and turns...What's more, mixing more traditional metalcore, for which Beartooth are known, with dashes of country and straight-ahead rock make for a great blend, making The Surface a mesmerizing listen." Katie Bird of Distorted Sound stated that "Whilst a couple of the songs don't quite hit all the right notes, the rest of the album is masterful...The band do try new things, but these just hint at what's to come, which leaves the future open. Beartooth have come a long way since 2012, and it is a joy to see them finally finding the light after so long in the dark." Jake Richardson writing for Kerrang! considered the release to be "[...] a collection of tracks that are the best and most consistent Beartooth have ever sounded on record. The impression these songs make is instant, but scratch beneath the surface, and there's so much more to love about the heart, hurt and craft that has gone into this album."Metal Hammer gave the album a positive review and stated that "As a whole, The Surface is a sharp, poignant and blazingly cathartic celebration of life, warts and all." Mike DeWald of Riff felt that Beartooth "[achieved] musical maturity and growth" with The Surface. Simon Crampton of Rock Sins stated, "They manage to make music that is deeply personal, excruciatingly honest, accessible, catchy as hell and still heavier than most of what their peers are doing. This is another instant classic from a band that seems incapable of delivering anything less." Melinda Welsh of Spill Magazine felt that lyrically, [Shomo shows] incredible strides on his journey to find a better version of himself." Paul Brown of Wall of Sound was postive towards the album saying: "the innovation [Caleb Shomo] has made through the storytelling of this Disgusting, Aggressive, Disease, Below, The Surface needs to be commended. The way he's taken us on an adventure of highs, and plenty of dark and twisted lows is nothing short of inspirational. By capping it all off with this closing chapter, we see a role model in the making hellbent on encouraging positive change in the world and the way we look at ourselves in the mirror."

Track listing
Personnel
Beartooth

Caleb Shomo – lead vocals, production, mastering, mixing, engineering
Zach Huston – lead guitar, backing vocals
Will Deely – rhythm guitar, backing vocals
Oshie Bichar – bass, backing vocals, additional production
Connor Denis – drums, backing vocalsAdditional musicians

Hardy – guest vocals on track 4Additional personnel

James Musshorn – additional engineering

Charts


== References ==